Glutamate, the major excitatory neurotransmitter in the 
mammalian central nervous system (CNS), activates two 
types of ionotropic glutamate receptors (GluRs). Ac- 
cording to their pharmacological properties, they are 
termed ~-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionate 
(AMPA)/kainate receptors (or non-NMDARs) and N-methyl- 
D-aspartate receptors (NMDARs). The two types of recep- 
tors differ in several functional properties, including gating 
kinetics, block by extracellular Mg 2÷, and permeability to 
Ca 2+. Using cultured neurons from hippocampus and spi- 
nal cord, Mayer and Westbrook (1987) estimated that the 
relative Ca 2+ permeability of non-NMDARs is about 100- 
fold lower than that of N MDARs (Pca/Prnonovalen~ of 0.15 and 
10.6, respectively). 
The view that non-NMDAR channels are almost imper- 
meable to Ca 2÷ was challenged in 1990 by l ino and cowork- 
ers. In the majority of cultured hippocampal neurons (type 
I neurons), they found non-NMDARs with a low Ca 2+ per- 
meability (Pca/P ...... ,ent of - 0.1) and a linear or outwardly 
rectifying current-voltage (I-V) relation as described pre- 
viously. Surprisingly, however, in a small unidentified sub- 
set of cultured hippocampal neurons (type II neurons)non- 
NMDARs exhibited high Ca 2÷ permeability (Pca/Pmonovalent 
of -2) and an inwardly or doubly rectifying I-V relation 
(lino et al., 1990) (Figure 1A). In both type I and type II 
neurons, the non-NMDARs were subsequently identified 
as AMPA receptors (AMPARs) on the basis of their phar- 
macological profile (Ozawa and lino, 1993). 
These results raise several questions. Which cell types 
in the mature CNS express Ca2÷-permeable AMPARs? 
What is the molecular basis of the differences in Ca 2+ per- 
meability? What is the function of these Ca2÷-permeable 
AMPARs in excitatory synaptic transmission? Five years 
after the first description of Ca2÷-permeable AMPAR chan- 
nels, some answers are available. 
Recombinant Ca2+-Permeable AMPAR Channels 
Four AMPAR subunits (GluR-A-GluR-D or GluR1-GluR4) 
have been identified by molecular cloning (reviewed by 
Hollmann and Heinemann, 1994). Heterologous expres- 
sion of AMPAR subunits in Xenopus oocytes or human 
embryonic kidney cells indicates that the functional prop- 
erties of recombinant AMPARs are dependent on the sub- 
unit composition. Homomeric channels assembled from 
GluR-B subunits show normal behavior (Pca/Pmo~ov~ent of 
0.1 and outwardly rectifying I-V relation). Receptors as- 
sembled from GluR-A, -C, and -D subunits, however, are 
highly permeable to Ca 2÷ (Pca/P ...... ,en, of -- 2) and show 
a doubly rectifying I-V relation (Hollmann et al., 1991; Ver- 
doorn et al., 1991; Burnashev et al., 1992a), resembling 
the native AMPARs in type II neurons. AMPARs assem- 
bled from GluR-A, -C, and -D subunits are permeable to 
Mg 2+ and Ba 2+ as well as Ca 2÷ (Burnashev et al., 1992a; 
Dingledine et al., 1992). In heteromeric combinations, 
GluR-B is functionally dominant in determining the Ca 2÷ 
permeability. Coexpression of GluR-B subunits and 
GluR-A, -C, and -D subunits at equal proportions results 
in the formation of recombinant channels with a low Ca 2÷ 
permeability and an outwardly rectifying I-V relationship 
(Hollmann et al., 1991; Verdoorn et al., 1991; Burnashev 
et al., 1992a). 
Comparison of the amino acid sequence of the GluR-B 
subunit with that of the GluR-A, -C, and -D subunits reveals 
a marked difference in the putative transmembrane seg- 
ment M2. A positively charged arginine (R) is present at 
position 586 of the GluR-B subunit, whereas a neutral glu- 
tamine (Q) is found at the homologousposition in the other 
subunits (reviewed by Hollmann and Heinemann, 1994). 
This position is termed the Q/R site. Mutational analysis 
indicates that the Ca 2÷ permeability of channels assem- 
bled from GluR-B subunits in which the arginine is re- 
placed by glutamine (GluR-B(R586Q)) is high, whereas 
the Ca 2+ permeability of channels assembled from GluR-D 
subunits in which the glutamine is replaced by arginine 
(GluR-D(Q587R)) is low. Since these mutant channels 
show reversed Ca 2÷ permeability as compared with chan- 
nels assembled from the respective wild-type subunits, 
the Q/R site appears to be the main site controlling divalent 
ion permeation of recombinant AMPARs (Hume et al., 
1991; Burnashev et al., 1992a; Dingledine et al., 1992). 
The original concept of how the Ca 2÷ permeability of 
recombinant AMPARs is regulated by the residue at the 
Q/R site had to be modified in two important respects. 
First, the genomic GluR-B DNA surprisingly contains a 
glutamine codon at the Q/R site; the arginine codon is 
introduced by editing of GluR-B pre-mRNA (Sommer et 
al., 1991). Second, mapping of intra- and extracellular re- 
gions of GluR subunit proteins by introducing reporter 
sites indicates that the stretch of amino acids around the 
Q/R site is not a transmembrane segment, but more likely 
forms a pore loop extending into the aqueous pore from 
the intracellular side (reviewed by MacKinnon, 1995). 
Native Ca2+.Permeable AMPAR Channels 
Native AMPARs are likely to be heteromers assembled 
from GluR-A-GluR-D subunits. Since the expression of 
GluR-B subunits determines the Ca 2÷ permeability of re- 
combinant AMPARs in host cells, similar mechanisms 
might operate in the CNS when native GluRs are assem- 
bled. Until 1992, however, no direct evidence in favor of 
this hypothesis was available. In situ hybridization with 
GluR subunit-specific oligonucleotide probes indicates 
that GluR-B mRNA is ubiquitously expressed in the CNS 
(reviewed by Hollmann and Heinemann, 1994). Accord- 
ingly, AMPARs in various types of principal neurons (e.g., 
hippocampal pyramidal and granule neurons) exhibit low 